HELP MOTIF                                   Jonathan Meyer, Nov 1990

This file describes the POPLOG interface to the Motif Widget Set.


         CONTENTS - (Use <ENTER> g to access required sections)

 -- Introduction
 -- Accessing Motif in POPLOG
 -- Motif Widgets
 -- Shell Widgets
 -- Display Widgets
 -- Container Widgets
 -- Dialog Widgets
 -- Menu Widgets
 -- Associated Documentation

-- Introduction -------------------------------------------------------

Motif is an X Toolkit widgetset that provides a collection of widgets
for building applications conforming to the Motif look-and-feel. Motif
was written by the Open Software Foundation (OSF). Motif applications
are capable of running on any X11 servers, although there may be files
that need to be installed in the app-defaults and lib/X11 directories of
the X installation.

POPLOG does not include full online documentation of Motif. For
details, the user should consult the books and manuals listed in the
'Associated Documentation' section below.

TEACH *XmDemos describes some demonstration programs written in Pop-11
using the Motif widgetset. Programmers wishing to make use of Motif
widgets may wish to run these programs and examine the source code. The
demonstrations include at least one instance of every Motif widget.

TEACH *MOTIF is a worked example showing you how to make a simple Motif
control panel. Working through this example will give you a better
understanding of using widgets in POPLOG.

-- Accessing Motif in POPLOG ---------------------------------------

POPLOG does not have Motif widgets built into its binary. To use Motif
widgets, they must be dynamically loaded from a C object library.

By default, to detect the presence of Motif capabilities, and also to
find the Motif C object libraries, POPLOG expects the environment
variable MOTIFHOME to be set. MOTIFHOME should be a string specifying
the directory of the base of an Motif installation. More specifically,
POPLOG looks for the C object library for Motif in $MOTIFHOME/lib. The
include file INCLUDE *XDEFS defines the symbol XMOTIF if $MOTIFHOME is
set, though your site may have modified this file to remove this
requirement.

-- Motif Widgets ---------------------------------------------------

Motif includes several types of widgets: "Shell Widgets" are top level
windows. "Display Widgets" are widgets which display information
and allow users to perform actions on them. "Container Widgets" are
widgets which are used to contain and organise other widgets. "Dialog
Widgets" include pre-packaged combinations of container and display
widgets, and also include widgets useful for creating dialog boxes.
"Menu Widgets" are used to create walking menus. Members of each
category of widgets are shown in sections below.

The following list shows every widget, gadget and object that is
available in Motif:

    PrimitiveWidget
    Gadget
    ManagerWidget
    ArrowButtonWidget
    ArrowButtonGadget
    BulletinBoardWidget
    CascadeButtonWidget
    CascadeButtonGadget
    CommandWidget
    DialogShellWidget
    DrawingAreaWidget
    DrawnButtonWidget
    ExtObject
    FileSelectionBoxWidget
    FormWidget
    FrameWidget
    LabelWidget
    LabelGadget
    ListWidget
    MainWindowWidget
    MenuShellWidget
    MessageBoxWidget
    PanedWindowWidget
    PushButtonWidget
    PushButtonGadget
    RowColumnWidget
    ScaleWidget
    ScrollBarWidget
    ScrolledWindowWidget
    SelectionBoxWidget
    SeparatorGadget
    SeparatorWidget
    TextWidget
    TextFieldWidget
    ToggleButtonWidget
    ToggleButtonGadget
    DesktopObject
    WorldObject
    DisplayObject
    ScreenObject
    ShellExtObject
    VendorShellExtObject

-- Shell Widgets ------------------------------------------------------

    DialogShellWidget   - popup window for dialog boxes ("Transient")
    MenuShellWidget     - popup window for shells ("Override")

-- Display Widgets ----------------------------------------------------

    PrimitiveWidget      - basic display widget
    ArrowButtonWidget    - button containing up/down/left/right arrow
    DrawnButtonWidget    - blank button with exposure callback
    LabelWidget          - widget with text label
    ListWidget           - list with horizontal/vertical scrollbar
    PushButtonWidget     - button with label
    ScrollBarWidget      - horizontal/vertical scrollbar
    SeparatorWidget      - widget containing a drawn line
    TextWidget           - text editor widget
    TextFieldWidget      - text entry field widget
    ToggleButtonWidget   - on/off button (square/triangular)

-- Container Widgets --------------------------------------------------

    ManagerWidget        - basic container widget
    DrawingAreaWidget    - blank widget with exposure callback
    FrameWidget          - draws a frame around a single child
    MainWindowWidget     - basic menubar+scrollbars+command entry window
    PanedWindowWidget    - variable dividing line between widgets
    RowColumnWidget      - for general purpose row/column lists
    ScaleWidget          - sliding scale (can have tickmarks)
    ScrolledWindowWidget - viewport on a larger widget

-- Dialog Widgets -----------------------------------------------------

    BulletinBoardWidget  - non-constraint generic container widget
    CommandWidget        - command entry with scrolling command history
    FileSelectionBoxWidget - full file browser/selector
    FormWidget           - constraint based generic container widget
    MessageBoxWidget     - warning/error/information/prompt window
    SelectionBoxWidget   - selector for scrolling list of options

-- Menu Widgets -------------------------------------------------------

    CascadeButtonWidget - walking menu widget


-- Associated Documentation -------------------------------------------

For a complete description of Motif widgets, see the OSF/MOTIF Manual
Set, specifically:

    OSF/MOTIF 1.1 Volume 2: Programmer's Guide
    OSF/MOTIF 1.1 Volume 3: Programmer's Reference Part 1
    OSF/MOTIF 1.1 Volume 4: Programmer's Reference Part 2

    TEACH *XTOOLKIT     - Tutorial about the X Toolkit
    TEACH *MOTIF        - Tutorial for Motif widgets
    TEACH *XmDemos      - Demonstrations using Motif widgets
    HELP  *X            - Overview of X facilities in POPLOG
    HELP  *Xpw          - The POPLOG Widget Set
    REF   *XptWidgetSet - loading widgets in POPLOG

--- C.x/x/pop/help/motif
--- Copyright University of Sussex 1990. All rights reserved. ----------
