POPVISION README FILE                           David Young, Sep 1995
Modified A.Sloman 16 Nov 2002

The POPVISION package contains some programs for low-level computer
vision and image processing, together with teaching material used at
Sussex. Please mail me (d.s.young@cogs.susx.ac.uk) if you have any
queries about it.

If the POPVISION package was obtained on floppy disc, on tape, or by
FTP, it should have been uncompressed and untarred into a suitable
directory. At Sussex the directory used is $poplocal/local. If the
package was obtained as part of the contrib directory, it can stay where
it is, usually in $usepop/contrib, or be moved to another location if
preferred. In what follows, the symbol DDD means the directory one level
above popvision. (E.g. at Sussex DDD is $poplocal/local, but could also
be $usepop/contrib.) Thus you should have a directory DDD/popvision, and
beneath that DDD/popvision/lib, DDD/popvision/teach etc.  This file is
DDD/popvision/README.

The package should be usable on SPARC machines immediately. For other
machines, see below.

To make the package available to users, an access file should be
inserted in one of the directories searched by the existing POPLOG
system, for instance $poplocal/local/lib. (That is, the directory should
be a member of the default value of *popuseslist.) This file should be
called popvision.p and (apart from comments) should contain the
following single line of Pop-11, substituting the appropriate directory
for DDD:

    compile('DDD/popvision/lib/popvision.p');

Users can then access the package with the command

    uses popvision

or with the Ved command "<ENTER> lib popvision".

Startup is much speeded up if a saved image is provided, and the teach
files assume that this has been done. Provided that a public popvision.p
file has been installed as just described, this can be done with the
script in DDD/popvision/com/mkpopvision.

If C routines need recompiling, this can be done for Solaris systems
using the scripts in DDD/popvision/com/compile_popvision or
compile_popvision_gcc. For linux or Dec Alpha unix systems use
compile_popvision_linux or compile_popvision_alpha respectively.

The scripts should be run with the current directory set to
DDD/popvision/lib. The script can be adapted for other architectures and
operating systems, replacing "sun4r5" with the head of the POPLOG
variable sys_machine_type, and changing the compiler flags as needed.
For details of the compiler flags needed for different systems, see
REF * EXTERNAL.

Previously, the sunrasterfile routine would not correctly read the image
data files on machines with numbers represented using byte orderings
different from SPARC systems. (That is, a different "sex".) This has
been fixed.

For further details of the package, see the file
DDD/popvision/help/popvision, or better, set up the package and look at
HELP * POPVISION. To start learning about computer vision, see TEACH *
VISION1.


--- _________________$popvision/README
--- _________Copyright __________University __of ______Sussex _____1995. ___All ______rights _________reserved.
