HELP NETWORKSMENU                          Julian Clinton  Feb 1990


This file describes the options available on the Networks Menu.

         CONTENTS - (Use <ENTER> g to access required sections)

 -- 'New'
 -- 'Display'
 -- 'Edit'
 -- 'Copy'
 -- 'Delete'
 -- 'Set Current'
 -- 'List All'
 -- 'Load'
 -- 'Save'

-- 'New' --------------------------------------------------------------

This option allows to create a new network. A menu of available network
types appears and you select the type of network you want to create. You
will then be asked to enter the details of the network. The sort of
information you will be asked for is:

    the network name (a word, see HELP *WORDS)
    the number of input units
    the number of output units
    the number of hidden layers
    the number of units in each hidden layer
    network-specific learning parameters

Note that for networks which have a number of hidden layers, these are
numbered from 1 to <n> where layer 1 is attached to the input layer.


-- 'Display' ----------------------------------------------------------

This option allows you to display information about an already defined
network. On standard terminals, this will be textual information
describing the name, type and layout of the network. On bit-mapped
terminals when the *NETDISPLAY library has been loaded (e.g. when
running Poplog-Neural in  graphical user interface mode), this will
display the network topology in a graphics window.


-- 'Edit' -------------------------------------------------------------

This option allows you to change the parameters associated with a
particular network type. It does not allow you to change the shape of a
network (you will need to create a new network with the required
topology to do this).


-- 'Copy' -------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes it is useful to create a copy of a network (if you want to
adjust the learning parameters to see how this affects the network's
learning ability). Selecting this option will prompt you for the source
network and then the name of the network copy.


-- 'Delete' -----------------------------------------------------------

This option allows you to delete networks which you have created and no
longer need. You will be prompted for the network name and then asked to
confirm the deletion. THIS OPERATION CANNOT BE UNDONE.


-- 'Set Current' ------------------------------------------------------

Usually you are likely to be interested in a particular network at a
time. This is defined to be the current network and is held in the
variable NN_CURRENT_NET. This option allows you to change the current
network.


-- 'List All' ---------------------------------------------------------

This options prints the names of all currently defined networks.


-- 'Load' -------------------------------------------------------------

This option allows you to load a network from a file on disk. Network
files have a '.net' suffix. You will prompted for the directory and this
will then be scanned for all files ending in '.net'. The list of
networks in the current directory will be displayed. You should then
enter the names of the networks which you want to load from this list.
Press <RETURN> after each name. When you have finished entering names,
press <RETURN> again. The networks will be loaded. Note that if you want
to load all of the networks in the current directory, type 'all' as the
first network and then press <RETURN>.


-- 'Save' -------------------------------------------------------------

This option allows you to save a network to disk. You will be prompted
for the directory and then a list of the currently defined networks will
be printed. Type the name of each network you want saved followed by
<RETURN>. Type <RETURN> again when you have finished entering names. The
specified networks will be saved, one per file. The filename will by the
name of the network followed by a '.net' suffix.


--- Copyright Integral Solutions Ltd. 1990. All rights reserved. ---
